BOOK 6

6.1.1
     O Thou, my hope from my youth, where wert Thou to me, and whither 
wert Thou gone? Hadst not Thou created me, and separated me from the 
beasts of the field, and fowls of the air? Thou hadst made me wiser, 
yet did I walk in darkness, and in slippery places, and sought Thee 
abroad out of myself, and found not the God of my heart; and had come 
into the depths of the sea, and distrusted and despaired of ever finding 
truth. My mother had now come to me, resolute through piety, following 
me over sea and land, in all perils confiding in Thee. For in perils 
of the sea, she comforted the very mariners (by whom passengers unacquainted 
with the deep, use rather to be comforted when troubled), assuring 
them of a safe arrival, because Thou hadst by a vision assured her 
thereof. She found me in grievous peril, through despair of ever finding 
truth. But when I had discovered to her that I was now no longer a 
Manichee, though not yet a Catholic Christian, she was not overjoyed, 
as at something unexpected; although she was now assured concerning 
that part of my misery, for which she bewailed me as one dead, though 
to be reawakened by Thee, carrying me forth upon the bier of her thoughts, 
that Thou mightest say to the son of the widow, Young man, I say unto 
thee, Arise; and he should revive, and begin to speak, and Thou shouldest 
deliver him to his mother. Her heart then was shaken with no tumultuous 
exultation, when she heard that what she daily with tears desired 
of Thee was already in so great part realised; in that, though I had 
not yet attained the truth, I was rescued from falsehood; but, as 
being assured, that Thou, Who hadst promised the whole, wouldest one 
day give the rest, most calmly, and with a heart full of confidence, 
she replied to me, "She believed in Christ, that before she departed 
this life, she should see me a Catholic believer." Thus much to me. 
But to Thee, Fountain of mercies, poured she forth more copious prayers 
and tears, that Thou wouldest hasten Thy help, and enlighten my darkness; 
and she hastened the more eagerly to the Church, and hung upon the 
lips of Ambrose, praying for the fountain of that water, which springeth 
up unto life everlasting. But that man she loved as an angel of God, 
because she knew that by him I had been brought for the present to 
that doubtful state of faith I now was in, through which she anticipated 
most confidently that I should pass from sickness unto health, after 
the access, as it were, of a sharper fit, which physicians call "the 
crisis." 

6.2.2
     When then my mother had once, as she was wont in Afric, brought 
to the Churches built in memory of the Saints, certain cakes, and 
bread and wine, and was forbidden by the door-keeper; so soon as she 
knew that the Bishop had forbidden this, she so piously and obediently 
embraced his wishes, that I myself wondered how readily she censured 
her own practice, rather than discuss his prohibition. For wine-bibbing 
did not lay siege to her spirit, nor did love of wine provoke her 
to hatred of the truth, as it doth too many (both men and women), 
who revolt at a lesson of sobriety, as men well-drunk at a draught 
mingled with water. But she, when she had brought her basket with 
the accustomed festival-food, to be but tasted by herself, and then 
given away, never joined therewith more than one small cup of wine, 
diluted according to her own abstemious habits, which for courtesy 
she would taste. And if there were many churches of the departed saints 
that were to be honoured in that manner, she still carried round that 
same one cup, to be used every where; and this, though not only made 
very watery, but unpleasantly heated with carrying about, she would 
distribute to those about her by small sips; for she sought there 
devotion, not pleasure. So soon, then, as she found this custom to 
be forbidden by that famous preacher and most pious prelate, even 
to those that would use it soberly, lest so an occasion of excess 
might be given to the drunken; and for these, as it were, anniversary 
funeral solemnities did much resemble the superstition of the Gentiles, 
she most willingly forbare it: and for a basket filled with fruits 
of the earth, she had learned to bring to the Churches of the martyrs 
a breast filled with more purified petitions, and to give what she 
could to the poor; that so the communication of the Lord's Body might 
be there rightly celebrated, where, after the example of His Passion, 
the martyrs had been sacrificed and crowned. But yet it seems to me, 
O Lord my God, and thus thinks my heart of it in Thy sight, that perhaps 
she would not so readily have yielded to the cutting off of this custom, 
had it been forbidden by another, whom she loved not as Ambrose, whom, 
for my salvation, she loved most entirely; and he her again, for her 
most religious conversation, whereby in good works, so fervent in 
spirit, she was constant at church; so that, when he saw me, he often 
burst forth into her praises; congratulating me that I had such a 
mother; not knowing what a son she had in me, who doubted of all these 
things, and imagined the way to life could not be found out. 

6.3.3
     Nor did I yet groan in my prayers, that Thou wouldest help me; 
but my spirit was wholly intent on learning, and restless to dispute. 
And Ambrose himself, as the world counts happy, I esteemed a happy 
man, whom personages so great held in such honour; only his celibacy 
seemed to me a painful course. But what hope he bore within him, what 
struggles he had against the temptations which beset his very excellencies, 
or what comfort in adversities, and what sweet joys Thy Bread had 
for the hidden mouth of his spirit, when chewing the cud thereof, 
I neither could conjecture, nor had experienced. Nor did he know the 
tides of my feelings, or the abyss of my danger. For I could not ask 
of him, what I would as I would, being shut out both from his ear 
and speech by multitudes of busy people, whose weaknesses he served. 
With whom when he was not taken up (which was but a little time), 
he was either refreshing his body with the sustenance absolutely necessary, 
or his mind with reading. But when he was reading, his eye glided 
over the pages, and his heart searched out the sense, but his voice 
and tongue were at rest. Ofttimes when we had come (for no man was 
forbidden to enter, nor was it his wont that any who came should be 
announced to him), we saw him thus reading to himself, and never otherwise; 
and having long sat silent (for who durst intrude on one so intent?) 
we were fain to depart, conjecturing that in the small interval which 
he obtained, free from the din of others' business, for the recruiting 
of his mind, he was loth to be taken off; and perchance he dreaded 
lest if the author he read should deliver any thing obscurely, some 
attentive or perplexed hearer should desire him to expound it, or 
to discuss some of the harder questions; so that his time being thus 
spent, he could not turn over so many volumes as he desired; although 
the preserving of his voice (which a very little speaking would weaken) 
might be the truer reason for his reading to himself. But with what 
intent soever he did it, certainly in such a man it was good. 

6.3.4
     I however certainly had no opportunity of enquiring what I wished 
of that so holy oracle of Thine, his breast, unless the thing might 
be answered briefly. But those tides in me, to be poured out to him, 
required his full leisure, and never found it. I heard him indeed 
every Lord's day, rightly expounding the Word of truth among the people; 
and I was more and more convinced that all the knots of those crafty 
calumnies, which those our deceivers had knit against the Divine Books, 
could be unravelled. But when I understood withal, that "man created 
by Thee, after Thine own image," was not so understood by Thy spiritual 
sons, whom of the Catholic Mother Thou hast born again through grace, 
as though they believed and conceived of Thee as bounded by human 
shape (although what a spiritual substance should be I had not even 
a faint or shadowy notion); yet, with joy I blushed at having so many 
years barked not against the Catholic faith, but against the fictions 
of carnal imaginations. For so rash and impious had I been, that what 
I ought by enquiring to have learned, I had pronounced on, condemning. 
For Thou, Most High, and most near; most secret, and most present; 
Who hast not limbs some larger, some smaller, but art wholly every 
where, and no where in space, art not of such corporeal shape, yet 
hast Thou made man after Thine own image; and behold, from head to 
foot is he contained in space. 

6.4.5
     Ignorant then how this Thy image should subsist, I should have 
knocked and proposed the doubt, how it was to be believed, not insultingly 
opposed it, as if believed. Doubt, then, what to hold for certain, 
the more sharply gnawed my heart, the more ashamed I was, that so 
long deluded and deceived by the promise of certainties, I had with 
childish error and vehemence, prated of so many uncertainties. For 
that they were falsehoods became clear to me later. However I was 
certain that they were uncertain, and that I had formerly accounted 
them certain, when with a blind contentiousness, I accused Thy Catholic 
Church, whom I now discovered, not indeed as yet to teach truly, but 
at least not to teach that for which I had grievously censured her. 
So I was confounded, and converted: and I joyed, O my God, that the 
One Only Church, the body of Thine Only Son (wherein the name of Christ 
had been put upon me as an infant), had no taste for infantine conceits; 
nor in her sound doctrine maintained any tenet which should confine 
Thee, the Creator of all, in space, however great and large, yet bounded 
every where by the limits of a human form. 

6.4.6
     I joyed also that the old Scriptures of the law and the Prophets 
were laid before me, not now to be perused with that eye to which 
before they seemed absurd, when I reviled Thy holy ones for so thinking, 
whereas indeed they thought not so: and with joy I heard Ambrose in 
his sermons to the people, oftentimes most diligently recommend this 
text for a rule, The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life; whilst 
he drew aside the mystic veil, laying open spiritually what, according 
to the letter, seemed to teach something unsound; teaching herein 
nothing that offended me, though he taught what I knew not as yet, 
whether it were true. For I kept my heart from assenting to any thing, 
fearing to fall headlong; but by hanging in suspense I was the worse 
killed. For I wished to be as assured of the things I saw not, as 
I was that seven and three are ten. For I was not so mad as to think 
that even this could not be comprehended; but I desired to have other 
things as clear as this, whether things corporeal, which were not 
present to my senses, or spiritual, whereof I knew not how to conceive, 
except corporeally. And by believing might I have been cured, that 
so the eyesight of my soul being cleared, might in some way be directed 
to Thy truth, which abideth always, and in no part faileth. But as 
it happens that one who has tried a bad physician, fears to trust 
himself with a good one, so was it with the health of my soul, which 
could not be healed but by believing, and lest it should believe falsehoods, 
refused to be cured; resisting Thy hands, Who hast prepared the medicines 
of faith, and hast applied them to the diseases of the whole world, 
and given unto them so great authority. 

6.5.7
     Being led, however, from this to prefer the Catholic doctrine, 
I felt that her proceeding was more unassuming and honest, in that 
she required to be believed things not demonstrated (whether it was 
that they could in themselves be demonstrated but not to certain persons, 
or could not at all be), whereas among the Manichees our credulity 
was mocked by a promise of certain knowledge, and then so many most 
fabulous and absurd things were imposed to be believed, because they 
could not be demonstrated. Then Thou, O Lord, little by little with 
most tender and most merciful hand, touching and composing my heart, 
didst persuade me- considering what innumerable things I believed, 
which I saw not, nor was present while they were done, as so many 
things in secular history, so many reports of places and of cities, 
which I had not seen; so many of friends, so many of physicians, so 
many continually of other men, which unless we should believe, we 
should do nothing at all in this life; lastly, with how unshaken an 
assurance I believed of what parents I was born, which I could not 
know, had I not believed upon hearsay -considering all this, Thou 
didst persuade me, that not they who believed Thy Books (which Thou 
hast established in so great authority among almost all nations), 
but they who believed them not, were to be blamed; and that they were 
not to be heard, who should say to me, "How knowest thou those Scriptures 
to have been imparted unto mankind by the Spirit of the one true and 
most true God?" For this very thing was of all most to be believed, 
since no contentiousness of blasphemous questionings, of all that 
multitude which I had read in the self-contradicting philosophers, 
could wring this belief from me, "That Thou art" whatsoever Thou wert 
(what I knew not), and "That the government of human things belongs 
to Thee." 

6.5.8
     This I believed, sometimes more strongly, more weakly otherwhiles; 
yet I ever believed both that Thou wert, and hadst a care of us; though 
I was ignorant, both what was to be thought of Thy substance, and 
what way led or led back to Thee. Since then we were too weak by abstract 
reasonings to find out truth: and for this very cause needed the authority 
of Holy Writ; I had now begun to believe that Thou wouldest never 
have given such excellency of authority to that Writ in all lands, 
hadst Thou not willed thereby to be believed in, thereby sought. For 
now what things, sounding strangely in the Scripture, were wont to 
offend me, having heard divers of them expounded satisfactorily, I 
referred to the depth of the mysteries, and its authority appeared 
to me the more venerable, and more worthy of religious credence, in 
that, while it lay open to all to read, it reserved the majesty of 
its mysteries within its profounder meaning, stooping to all in the 
great plainness of its words and lowliness of its style, yet calling 
forth the intensest application of such as are not light of heart; 
that so it might receive all in its open bosom, and through narrow 
passages waft over towards Thee some few, yet many more than if it 
stood not aloft on such a height of authority, nor drew multitudes 
within its bosom by its holy lowliness. These things I thought on, 
and Thou wert with me; I sighed, and Thou heardest me; I wavered, 
and Thou didst guide me; I wandered through the broad way of the world, 
and Thou didst not forsake me. 

6.6.9
     I panted after honours, gains, marriage; and thou deridedst me. 
In these desires I underwent most bitter crosses, Thou being the more 
gracious, the less Thou sufferedst aught to grow sweet to me, which 
was not Thou. Behold my heart, O Lord, who wouldest I should remember 
all this, and confess to Thee. Let my soul cleave unto Thee, now that 
Thou hast freed it from that fast-holding birdlime of death. How wretched 
was it! and Thou didst irritate the feeling of its wound, that forsaking 
all else, it might be converted unto Thee, who art above all, and 
without whom all things would be nothing; be converted, and be healed. 
How miserable was I then, and how didst Thou deal with me, to make 
me feel my misery on that day, when I was preparing to recite a panegyric 
of the Emperor, wherein I was to utter many a lie, and lying, was 
to be applauded by those who knew I lied, and my heart was panting 
with these anxieties, and boiling with the feverishness of consuming 
thoughts. For, passing through one of the streets of Milan, I observed 
a poor beggar, then, I suppose, with a full belly, joking and joyous: 
and I sighed, and spoke to the friends around me, of the many sorrows 
of our frenzies; for that by all such efforts of ours, as those wherein 
I then toiled dragging along, under the goading of desire, the burthen 
of my own wretchedness, and, by dragging, augmenting it, we yet looked 
to arrive only at that very joyousness whither that beggar-man had 
arrived before us, who should never perchance attain it. For what 
he had obtained by means of a few begged pence, the same was I plotting 
for by many a toilsome turning and winding; the joy of a temporary 
felicity. For he verily had not the true joy; but yet I with those 
my ambitious designs was seeking one much less true. And certainly 
he was joyous, I anxious; he void of care, I full of fears. But should 
any ask me, had I rather be merry or fearful? I would answer merry. 
Again, if he asked had I rather be such as he was, or what I then 
was? I should choose to be myself, though worn with cares and fears; 
but out of wrong judgment; for, was it the truth? For I ought not 
to prefer myself to him, because more learned than he, seeing I had 
no joy therein, but sought to please men by it; and that not to instruct, 
but simply to please. Wherefore also Thou didst break my bones with 
the staff of Thy correction. 

6.6.10
     Away with those then from my soul who say to her, "It makes a 
difference whence a man's joy is. That beggar-man joyed in drunkenness; 
Thou desiredst to joy in glory." What glory, Lord? That which is not 
in Thee. For even as his was no true joy, so was that no true glory: 
and it overthrew my soul more. He that very night should digest his 
drunkenness; but I had slept and risen again with mine, and was to 
sleep again, and again to rise with it, how many days, Thou, God, 
knowest. But "it doth make a difference whence a man's joy is." I 
know it, and the joy of a faithful hope lieth incomparably beyond 
such vanity. Yea, and so was he then beyond me: for he verily was 
the happier; not only for that he was thoroughly drenched in mirth, 
I disembowelled with cares: but he, by fair wishes, had gotten wine; 
I, by lying, was seeking for empty, swelling praise. Much to this 
purpose said I then to my friends: and I often marked in them how 
it fared with me; and I found it went ill with me, and grieved, and 
doubled that very ill; and if any prosperity smiled on me, I was loth 
to catch at it, for almost before I could grasp it, it flew away. 

6.7.11
     These things we, who were living as friends together, bemoaned 
together, but chiefly and most familiarly did I speak thereof with 
Alypius and Nebridius, of whom Alypius was born in the same town with 
me, of persons of chief rank there, but younger than I. For he had 
studied under me, both when I first lectured in our town, and afterwards 
at Carthage, and he loved me much, because I seemed to him kind, and 
learned; and I him, for his great towardliness to virtue, which was 
eminent enough in one of no greater years. Yet the whirlpool of Carthaginian 
habits (amongst whom those idle spectacles are hotly followed) had 
drawn him into the madness of the Circus. But while he was miserably 
tossed therein, and I, professing rhetoric there, had a public school, 
as yet he used not my teaching, by reason of some unkindness risen 
betwixt his father and me. I had found then how deadly he doted upon 
the Circus, and was deeply grieved that he seemed likely, nay, or 
had thrown away so great promise: yet had I no means of advising or 
with a sort of constraint reclaiming him, either by the kindness of 
a friend, or the authority of a master. For I supposed that he thought 
of me as did his father; but he was not such; laying aside then his 
father's mind in that matter, he began to greet me, come sometimes 
into my lecture room, hear a little, and be gone. 

6.7.12
     I however had forgotten to deal with him, that he should not, 
through a blind and headlong desire of vain pastimes, undo so good 
a wit. But Thou, O Lord, who guidest the course of all Thou hast created, 
hadst not forgotten him, who was one day to be among Thy children, 
Priest and Dispenser of Thy Sacrament; and that his amendment might 
plainly be attributed to Thyself, Thou effectedst it through me, unknowingly. 
For as one day I sat in my accustomed place, with my scholars before 
me, he entered, greeted me, sat down, and applied his mind to what 
I then handled. I had by chance a passage in hand, which while I was 
explaining, a likeness from the Circensian races occurred to me, as 
likely to make what I would convey pleasanter and plainer, seasoned 
with biting mockery of those whom that madness had enthralled; God, 
Thou knowest that I then thought not of curing Alypius of that infection. 
But he took it wholly to himself, and thought that I said it simply 
for his sake. And whence another would have taken occasion of offence 
with me, that right-minded youth took as a ground of being offended 
at himself, and loving me more fervently. For Thou hadst said it long 
ago, and put it into Thy book, Rebuke a wise man and he will love 
Thee. But I had not rebuked him, but Thou, who employest all, knowing 
or not knowing, in that order which Thyself knowest (and that order 
is just), didst of my heart and tongue make burning coals, by which 
to set on fire the hopeful mind, thus languishing, and so cure it. 
Let him be silent in Thy praises, who considers not Thy mercies, which 
confess unto Thee out of my inmost soul. For he upon that speech burst 
out of that pit so deep, wherein he was wilfully plunged, and was 
blinded with its wretched pastimes; and he shook his mind with a strong 
self-command; whereupon all the filths of the Circensian pastimes 
flew off from him, nor came he again thither. Upon this, he prevailed 
with his unwilling father that he might be my scholar. He gave way, 
and gave in. And Alypius beginning to be my hearer again, was involved 
in the same superstition with me, loving in the Manichees that show 
of continency which he supposed true and unfeigned. Whereas it was 
a senseless and seducing continency, ensnaring precious souls, unable 
as yet to reach the depth of virtue, yet readily beguiled with the 
surface of what was but a shadowy and counterfeit virtue. 

6.8.13
     He, not forsaking that secular course which his parents had charmed 
him to pursue, had gone before me to Rome, to study law, and there 
he was carried away incredibly with an incredible eagerness after 
the shows of gladiators. For being utterly averse to and detesting 
spectacles, he was one day by chance met by divers of his acquaintance 
and fellow-students coming from dinner, and they with a familiar violence 
haled him, vehemently refusing and resisting, into the Amphitheatre, 
during these cruel and deadly shows, he thus protesting: "Though you 
hale my body to that place, and there set me, can you force me also 
to turn my mind or my eyes to those shows? I shall then be absent 
while present, and so shall overcome both you and them." They, hearing 
this, led him on nevertheless, desirous perchance to try that very 
thing, whether he could do as he said. When they were come thither, 
and had taken their places as they could, the whole place kindled 
with that savage pastime. But he, closing the passage of his eyes, 
forbade his mind to range abroad after such evil; and would he had 
stopped his ears also! For in the fight, when one fell, a mighty cry 
of the whole people striking him strongly, overcome by curiosity, 
and as if prepared to despise and be superior to it whatsoever it 
were, even when seen, he opened his eyes, and was stricken with a 
deeper wound in his soul than the other, whom he desired to behold, 
was in his body; and he fell more miserably than he upon whose fall 
that mighty noise was raised, which entered through his ears, and 
unlocked his eyes, to make way for the striking and beating down of 
a soul, bold rather than resolute, and the weaker, in that it had 
presumed on itself, which ought to have relied on Thee. For so soon 
as he saw that blood, he therewith drunk down savageness; nor turned 
away, but fixed his eye, drinking in frenzy, unawares, and was delighted 
with that guilty fight, and intoxicated with the bloody pastime. Nor 
was he now the man he came, but one of the throng he came unto, yea, 
a true associate of theirs that brought him thither. Why say more? 
He beheld, shouted, kindled, carried thence with him the madness which 
should goad him to return not only with them who first drew him thither, 
but also before them, yea and to draw in others. Yet thence didst 
Thou with a most strong and most merciful hand pluck him, and taughtest 
him to have confidence not in himself, but in Thee. But this was after. 

6.9.14
     But this was already being laid up in his memory to be a medicine 
hereafter. So was that also, that when he was yet studying under me 
at Carthage, and was thinking over at mid-day in the market-place 
what he was to say by heart (as scholars use to practise), Thou sufferedst 
him to be apprehended by the officers of the market-place for a thief. 
For no other cause, I deem, didst Thou, our God, suffer it, but that 
he who was hereafter to prove so great a man, should already begin 
to learn that in judging of causes, man was not readily to be condemned 
by man out of a rash credulity. For as he was walking up and down 
by himself before the judgment-seat, with his note-book and pen, lo, 
a young man, a lawyer, the real thief, privily bringing a hatchet, 
got in, unperceived by Alypius, as far as the leaden gratings which 
fence in the silversmiths' shops, and began to cut away the lead. 
But the noise of the hatchet being heard, the silversmiths beneath 
began to make a stir, and sent to apprehend whomever they should find. 
But he, hearing their voices, ran away, leaving his hatchet, fearing 
to be taken with it. Alypius now, who had not seen him enter, was 
aware of his going, and saw with what speed he made away. And being 
desirous to know the matter, entered the place; where finding the 
hatchet, he was standing, wondering and considering it, when behold, 
those that had been sent, find him alone with the hatchet in his hand, 
the noise whereof had startled and brought them thither. They seize 
him, hale him away, and gathering the dwellers in the market-place 
together, boast of having taken a notorious thief, and so he was being 
led away to be taken before the judge. 

6.9.15
     But thus far was Alypius to be instructed. For forthwith, O Lord, 
Thou succouredst his innocency, whereof Thou alone wert witness. For 
as he was being led either to prison or to punishment, a certain architect 
met them, who had the chief charge of the public buildings. Glad they 
were to meet him especially, by whom they were wont to be suspected 
of stealing the goods lost out of the marketplace, as though to show 
him at last by whom these thefts were committed. He, however, had 
divers times seen Alypius at a certain senator's house, to whom he 
often went to pay his respects; and recognising him immediately, took 
him aside by the hand, and enquiring the occasion of so great a calamity, 
heard the whole matter, and bade all present, amid much uproar and 
threats, to go with him. So they came to the house of the young man 
who had done the deed. There, before the door, was a boy so young 
as to be likely, not apprehending any harm to his master, to disclose 
the whole. For he had attended his master to the market-place. Whom 
so soon as Alypius remembered, he told the architect: and he showing 
the hatchet to the boy, asked him "Whose that was?" "Ours," quoth 
he presently: and being further questioned, he discovered every thing. 
Thus the crime being transferred to that house, and the multitude 
ashamed, which had begun to insult over Alypius, he who was to be 
a dispenser of Thy Word, and an examiner of many causes in Thy Church, 
went away better experienced and instructed. 

6.10.16
     Him then I had found at Rome, and he clave to me by a most strong 
tie, and went with me to Milan, both that he might not leave me, and 
might practise something of the law he had studied, more to please 
his parents than himself. There he had thrice sat as Assessor, with 
an uncorruptness much wondered at by others, he wondering at others 
rather who could prefer gold to honesty. His character was tried besides, 
not only with the bait of covetousness, but with the goad of fear. 
At Rome he was Assessor to the count of the Italian Treasury. There 
was at that time a very powerful senator, to whose favours many stood 
indebted, many much feared. He would needs, by his usual power, have 
a thing allowed him which by the laws was unallowed. Alypius resisted 
it: a bribe was promised; with all his heart he scorned it: threats 
were held out; he trampled upon them: all wondering at so unwonted 
a spirit, which neither desired the friendship, nor feared the enmity 
of one so great and so mightily renowned for innumerable means of 
doing good or evil. And the very judge, whose councillor Alypius was, 
although also unwilling it should be, yet did not openly refuse, but 
put the matter off upon Alypius, alleging that he would not allow 
him to do it: for in truth had the judge done it, Alypius would have 
decided otherwise. With this one thing in the way of learning was 
he well-nigh seduced, that he might have books copied for him at Praetorian 
prices, but consulting justice, he altered his deliberation for the 
better; esteeming equity whereby he was hindered more gainful than 
the power whereby he were allowed. These are slight things, but he 
that is faithful in little, is faithful also in much. Nor can that 
any how be void, which proceeded out of the mouth of Thy Truth: If 
ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit 
to your trust true riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that 
which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own? 
He being such, did at that time cleave to me, and with me wavered 
in purpose, what course of life was to be taken. 

6.10.17
     Nebridius also, who having left his native country near Carthage, 
yea and Carthage itself, where he had much lived, leaving his excellent 
family-estate and house, and a mother behind, who was not to follow 
him, had come to Milan, for no other reason but that with me he might 
live in a most ardent search after truth and wisdom. Like me he sighed, 
like me he wavered, an ardent searcher after true life, and a most 
acute examiner of the most difficult questions. Thus were there the 
mouths of three indigent persons, sighing out their wants one to another, 
and waiting upon Thee that Thou mightest give them their meat in due 
season. And in all the bitterness which by Thy mercy followed our 
worldly affairs, as we looked towards the end, why we should suffer 
all this, darkness met us; and we turned away groaning, and saying, 
How long shall these things be? This too we often said; and so saying 
forsook them not, for as yet there dawned nothing certain, which these 
forsaken, we might embrace. 

6.11.18
     And I, viewing and reviewing things, most wondered at the length 
of time from that my nineteenth year, wherein I had begun to kindle 
with the desire of wisdom, settling when I had found her, to abandon 
all the empty hopes and lying frenzies of vain desires. And lo, I 
was now in my thirtieth year, sticking in the same mire, greedy of 
enjoying things present, which passed away and wasted my soul; while 
I said to myself, "Tomorrow I shall find it; it will appear manifestly 
and I shall grasp it; to, Faustus the Manichee will come, and clear 
every thing! O you great men, ye Academicians, it is true then, that 
no certainty can be attained for the ordering of life! Nay, let us 
search the more diligently, and despair not. Lo, things in the ecclesiastical 
books are not absurd to us now, which sometimes seemed absurd, and 
may be otherwise taken, and in a good sense. I will take my stand, 
where, as a child, my parents placed me, until the clear truth be 
found out. But where shall it be sought or when? Ambrose has no leisure; 
we have no leisure to read; where shall we find even the books? Whence, 
or when procure them? from whom borrow them? Let set times be appointed, 
and certain hours be ordered for the health of our soul. Great hope 
has dawned; the Catholic Faith teaches not what we thought, and vainly 
accused it of; her instructed members hold it profane to believe God 
to be bounded by the figure of a human body: and do we doubt to 'knock,' 
that the rest 'may be opened'? The forenoons our scholars take up; 
what do we during the rest? Why not this? But when then pay we court 
to our great friends, whose favour we need? When compose what we may 
sell to scholars? When refresh ourselves, unbending our minds from 
this intenseness of care? 

6.11.19
     "Perish every thing, dismiss we these empty vanities, and betake 
ourselves to the one search for truth! Life is vain, death uncertain; 
if it steals upon us on a sudden, in what state shall we depart hence? 
and where shall we learn what here we have neglected? and shall we 
not rather suffer the punishment of this negligence? What, if death 
itself cut off and end all care and feeling? Then must this be ascertained. 
But God forbid this! It is no vain and empty thing, that the excellent 
dignity of the authority of the Christian Faith hath overspread the 
whole world. Never would such and so great things be by God wrought 
for us, if with the death of the body the life of the soul came to 
an end. Wherefore delay then to abandon worldly hopes, and give ourselves 
wholly to seek after God and the blessed life? But wait! Even those 
things are pleasant; they have some, and no small sweetness. We must 
not lightly abandon them, for it were a shame to return again to them. 
See, it is no great matter now to obtain some station, and then what 
should we more wish for? We have store of powerful friends; if nothing 
else offer, and we be in much haste, at least a presidentship may 
be given us: and a wife with some money, that she increase not our 
charges: and this shall be the bound of desire. Many great men, and 
most worthy of imitation, have given themselves to the study of wisdom 
in the state of marriage. 

6.11.20
     While I went over these things, and these winds shifted and drove 
my heart this way and that, time passed on, but I delayed to turn 
to the Lord; and from day to day deferred to live in Thee, and deferred 
not daily to die in myself. Loving a happy life, I feared it in its 
own abode, and sought it, by fleeing from it. I thought I should be 
too miserable, unless folded in female arms; and of the medicine of 
Thy mercy to cure that infirmity I thought not, not having tried it. 
As for continency, I supposed it to be in our own power (though in 
myself I did not find that power), being so foolish as not to know 
what is written, None can be continent unless Thou give it; and that 
Thou wouldest give it, if with inward groanings I did knock at Thine 
ears, and with a settled faith did cast my care on Thee. 

6.12.21
     Alypius indeed kept me from marrying; alleging that so could 
we by no means with undistracted leisure live together in the love 
of wisdom, as we had long desired. For himself was even then most 
pure in this point, so that it was wonderful; and that the more, since 
in the outset of his youth he had entered into that course, but had 
not stuck fast therein; rather had he felt remorse and revolting at 
it, living thenceforth until now most continently. But I opposed him 
with the examples of those who as married men had cherished wisdom, 
and served God acceptably, and retained their friends, and loved them 
faithfully. Of whose greatness of spirit I was far short; and bound 
with the disease of the flesh, and its deadly sweetness, drew along 
my chain, dreading to be loosed, and as if my wound had been fretted, 
put back his good persuasions, as it were the hand of one that would 
unchain me. Moreover, by me did the serpent speak unto Alypius himself, 
by my tongue weaving and laying in his path pleasurable snares, wherein 
his virtuous and free feet might be entangled. 

6.12.22
     For when he wondered that I, whom he esteemed not slightly, should 
stick so fast in the birdlime of that pleasure, as to protest (so 
oft as we discussed it) that I could never lead a single life; and 
urged in my defence when I saw him wonder, that there was great difference 
between his momentary and scarce-remembered knowledge of that life, 
which so he might easily despise, and my continued acquaintance whereto 
if the honourable name of marriage were added, he ought not to wonder 
why I could not contemn that course; he began also to desire to be 
married; not as overcome with desire of such pleasure, but out of 
curiosity. For he would fain know, he said, what that should be, without 
which my life, to him so pleasing, would to me seem not life but a 
punishment. For his mind, free from that chain, was amazed at my thraldom; 
and through that amazement was going on to a desire of trying it, 
thence to the trial itself, and thence perhaps to sink into that bondage 
whereat he wondered, seeing he was willing to make a covenant with 
death; and he that loves danger, shall fall into it. For whatever 
honour there be in the office of well-ordering a married life, and 
a family, moved us but slightly. But me for the most part the habit 
of satisfying an insatiable appetite tormented, while it held me captive; 
him, an admiring wonder was leading captive. So were we, until Thou, 
O Most High, not forsaking our dust, commiserating us miserable, didst 
come to our help, by wondrous and secret ways. 

6.13.23
     Continual effort was made to have me married. I wooed, I was 
promised, chiefly through my mother's pains, that so once married, 
the health-giving baptism might cleanse me, towards which she rejoiced 
that I was being daily fitted, and observed that her prayers, and 
Thy promises, were being fulfilled in my faith. At which time verily, 
both at my request and her own longing, with strong cries of heart 
she daily begged of Thee, that Thou wouldest by a vision discover 
unto her something concerning my future marriage; Thou never wouldest. 
She saw indeed certain vain and fantastic things, such as the energy 
of the human spirit, busied thereon, brought together; and these she 
told me of, not with that confidence she was wont, when Thou showedst 
her any thing, but slighting them. For she could, she said, through 
a certain feeling, which in words she could not express, discern betwixt 
Thy revelations, and the dreams of her own soul. Yet the matter was 
pressed on, and a maiden asked in marriage, two years under the fit 
age; and, as pleasing, was waited for. 

6.14.24
     And many of us friends conferring about, and detesting the turbulent 
turmoils of human life, had debated and now almost resolved on living 
apart from business and the bustle of men; and this was to be thus 
obtained; we were to bring whatever we might severally procure, and 
make one household of all; so that through the truth of our friendship 
nothing should belong especially to any; but the whole thus derived 
from all, should as a whole belong to each, and all to all. We thought 
there might be some often persons in this society; some of whom were 
very rich, especially Romanianus our townsman, from childhood a very 
familiar friend of mine, whom the grievous perplexities of his affairs 
had brought up to court; who was the most earnest for this project; 
and therein was his voice of great weight, because his ample estate 
far exceeded any of the rest. We had settled also that two annual 
officers, as it were, should provide all things necessary, the rest 
being undisturbed. But when we began to consider whether the wives, 
which some of us already had, others hoped to have, would allow this, 
all that plan, which was being so well moulded, fell to pieces in 
our hands, was utterly dashed and cast aside. Thence we betook us 
to sighs, and groans, and our steps to follow the broad and beaten 
ways of the world; for many thoughts were in our heart, but Thy counsel 
standeth for ever. Out of which counsel Thou didst deride ours, and 
preparedst Thine own; purposing to give us meat in due season, and 
to fill our souls with blessing. 

6.15.25
     Meanwhile my sins were being multiplied, and my concubine being 
torn from my side as a hindrance to my marriage, my heart which clave 
unto her was torn and wounded and bleeding. And she returned to Afric, 
vowing unto Thee never to know any other man, leaving with me my son 
by her. But unhappy I, who could not imitate a very woman, impatient 
of delay, inasmuch as not till after two years was I to obtain her 
I sought not being so much a lover of marriage as a slave to lust, 
procured another, though no wife, that so by the servitude of an enduring 
custom, the disease of my soul might be kept up and carried on in 
its vigour, or even augmented, into the dominion of marriage. Nor 
was that my wound cured, which had been made by the cutting away of 
the former, but after inflammation and most acute pain, it mortified, 
and my pains became less acute, but more desperate. 

6.16.26
     To Thee be praise, glory to Thee, Fountain of mercies. I was 
becoming more miserable, and Thou nearer. Thy right hand was continually 
ready to pluck me out of the mire, and to wash me thoroughly, and 
I knew it not; nor did anything call me back from a yet deeper gulf 
of carnal pleasures, but the fear of death, and of Thy judgment to 
come; which amid all my changes, never departed from my breast. And 
in my disputes with my friends Alypius and Nebridius of the nature 
of good and evil, I held that Epicurus had in my mind won the palm, 
had I not believed that after death there remained a life for the 
soul, and places of requital according to men's deserts, which Epicurus 
would not believe. And I asked, "were we immortal, and to live in 
perpetual bodily pleasure, without fear of losing it, why should we 
not be happy, or what else should we seek?" not knowing that great 
misery was involved in this very thing, that, being thus sunk and 
blinded, I could not discern that light of excellence and beauty, 
to be embraced for its own sake, which the eye of flesh cannot see, 
and is seen by the inner man. Nor did I, unhappy, consider from what 
source it sprung, that even on these things, foul as they were, I 
with pleasure discoursed with my friends, nor could I, even according 
to the notions I then had of happiness, be happy without friends, 
amid what abundance soever of carnal pleasures. And yet these friends 
I loved for themselves only, and I felt that I was beloved of them 
again for myself only. 
     O crooked paths! Woe to the audacious soul, which hoped, by forsaking 
Thee, to gain some better thing! Turned it hath, and turned again, 
upon back, sides, and belly, yet all was painful; and Thou alone rest. 
And behold, Thou art at hand, and deliverest us from our wretched 
wanderings, and placest us in Thy way, and dost comfort us, and say, 
"Run; I will carry you; yea I will bring you through; there also will 
I carry you."

