BOOK 4

4.1.1
     For this space of nine years (from my nineteenth year to my eight--
and-twentieth) we lived seduced and seducing, deceived and deceiving, 
in divers lusts; openly, by sciences which they call liberal; secretly, 
with a false-named religion; here proud, there superstitious, every 
where vain. Here, hunting after the emptiness of popular praise, down 
even to theatrical applauses, and poetic prizes, and strifes for grassy 
garlands, and the follies of shows, and the intemperance of desires. 
There, desiring to be cleansed from these defilements, by carrying 
food to those who were called "elect" and "holy," out of which, in 
the workhouse of their stomachs, they should forge for us Angels and 
Gods, by whom we might be cleansed. These things did I follow, and 
practise with my friends, deceived by me, and with me. Let the arrogant 
mock me, and such as have not been, to their soul's health, stricken 
and cast down by Thee, O my God; but I would still confess to Thee 
mine own shame in Thy praise. Suffer me, I beseech Thee, and give 
me grace to go over in my present remembrance the wanderings of my 
forepassed time, and to offer unto Thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving. 
For what am I to myself without Thee, but a guide to mine own downfall? 
or what am I even at the best, but an infant sucking the milk Thou 
givest, and feeding upon Thee, the food that perisheth not? But what 
sort of man is any man, seeing he is but a man? Let now the strong 
and the mighty laugh at us, but let us poor and needy confess unto 
Thee. 

4.2.2
     In those years I taught rhetoric, and, overcome by cupidity, 
made sale of a loquacity to overcome by. Yet I preferred (Lord, Thou 
knowest) honest scholars (as they are accounted), and these I, without 
artifice, taught artifices, not to be practised against the life of 
the guiltless, though sometimes for the life of the guilty. And Thou, 
O God, from afar perceivedst me stumbling in that slippery course, 
and amid much smoke sending out some sparks of faithfulness, which 
I showed in that my guidance of such as loved vanity, and sought after 
leasing, myself their companion. In those years I had one, -not in 
that which is called lawful marriage, but whom I had found out in 
a wayward passion, void of understanding; yet but one, remaining faithful 
even to her; in whom I in my own case experienced what difference 
there is betwixt the self-restraint of the marriage-covenant, for 
the sake of issue, and the bargain of a lustful love, where children 
are born against their parents' will, although, once born, they constrain 
love. 

4.2.3
     I remember also, that when I had settled to enter the lists for 
a theatrical prize, some wizard asked me what I would give him to 
win; but I, detesting and abhorring such foul mysteries, answered, 
"Though the garland were of imperishable gold, I would not suffer 
a fly to be killed to gain me it. " For he was to kill some living 
creatures in his sacrifices, and by those honours to invite the devils 
to favour me. But this ill also I rejected, not out of a pure love 
for Thee, O God of my heart; for I knew not how to love Thee, who 
knew not how to conceive aught beyond a material brightness. And doth 
not a soul, sighing after such fictions, commit fornication against 
Thee, trust in things unreal, and feed the wind? Still I would not 
forsooth have sacrifices offered to devils for me, to whom I was sacrificing 
myself by that superstition. For what else is it to feed the wind, 
but to feed them, that is by going astray to become their pleasure 
and derision? 

4.3.4
     Those impostors then, whom they style Mathematicians, I consulted 
without scruple; because they seemed to use no sacrifice, nor to pray 
to any spirit for their divinations: which art, however, Christian 
and true piety consistently rejects and condemns. For, it is a good 
thing to confess unto Thee, and to say, Have mercy upon me, heal my 
soul, for I have sinned against Thee; and not to abuse Thy mercy for 
a licence to sin, but to remember the Lord's words, Behold, thou art 
made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. All which 
wholesome advice they labour to destroy, saying, "The cause of thy 
sin is inevitably determined in heaven"; and "This did Venus, or Saturn, 
or Mars": that man, forsooth, flesh and blood, and proud corruption, 
might be blameless; while the Creator and Ordainer of heaven and the 
stars is to bear the blame. And who is He but our God? the very sweetness 
and well-spring of righteousness, who renderest to every man according 
to his works: and a broken and contrite heart wilt Thou not despise. 

4.3.5
     There was in those days a wise man, very skilful in physic, and 
renowned therein, who had with his own proconsular hand put the Agonistic 
garland upon my distempered head, but not as a physician: for this 
disease Thou only curest, who resistest the proud, and givest grace 
to the humble. But didst Thou fail me even by that old man, or forbear 
to heal my soul? For having become more acquainted with him, and hanging 
assiduously and fixedly on his speech (for though in simple terms, 
it was vivid, lively, and earnest), when he had gathered by my discourse 
that I was given to the books of nativity-casters, he kindly and fatherly 
advised me to cast them away, and not fruitlessly bestow a care and 
diligence, necessary for useful things, upon these vanities; saying, 
that he had in his earliest years studied that art, so as to make 
it the profession whereby he should live, and that, understanding 
Hippocrates, he could soon have understood such a study as this; and 
yet he had given it over, and taken to physic, for no other reason 
but that he found it utterly false; and he, a grave man, would not 
get his living by deluding people. "But thou," saith he, "hast rhetoric 
to maintain thyself by, so that thou followest this of free choice, 
not of necessity: the more then oughtest thou to give me credit herein, 
who laboured to acquire it so perfectly as to get my living by it 
alone." Of whom when I had demanded, how then could many true things 
be foretold by it, he answered me (as he could) "that the force of 
chance, diffused throughout the whole order of things, brought this 
about. For if when a man by haphazard opens the pages of some poet, 
who sang and thought of something wholly different, a verse oftentimes 
fell out, wondrously agreeable to the present business: it were not 
to be wondered at, if out of the soul of man, unconscious what takes 
place in it, by some higher instinct an answer should be given, by 
hap, not by art, corresponding to the business and actions of the 
demander." 

4.3.6
     And thus much, either from or through him, Thou conveyedst to 
me, and tracedst in my memory, what I might hereafter examine for 
myself. But at that time neither he, nor my dearest Nebridius, a youth 
singularly good and of a holy fear, who derided the whole body of 
divination, could persuade me to cast it aside, the authority of the 
authors swaying me yet more, and as yet I had found no certain proof 
(such as I sought) whereby it might without all doubt appear, that 
what had been truly foretold by those consulted was the result of 
haphazard, not of the art of the star-gazers. 

4.4.7
     In those years when I first began to teach rhetoric in my native 
town, I had made one my friend, but too dear to me, from a community 
of pursuits, of mine own age, and, as myself, in the first opening 
flower of youth. He had grown up of a child with me, and we had been 
both school-fellows and play-fellows. But he was not yet my friend 
as afterwards, nor even then, as true friendship is; for true it cannot 
be, unless in such as Thou cementest together, cleaving unto Thee, 
by that love which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, 
which is given unto us. Yet was it but too sweet, ripened by the warmth 
of kindred studies: for, from the true faith (which he as a youth 
had not soundly and thoroughly imbibed), I had warped him also to 
those superstitious and pernicious fables, for which my mother bewailed 
me. With me he now erred in mind, nor could my soul be without him. 
But behold Thou wert close on the steps of Thy fugitives, at once 
God of vengeance, and Fountain of mercies, turning us to Thyself by 
wonderful means; Thou tookest that man out of this life, when he had 
scarce filled up one whole year of my friendship, sweet to me above 
all sweetness of that my life. 

4.4.8
     Who can recount all Thy praises, which he hath felt in his one 
self? What diddest Thou then, my God, and how unsearchable is the 
abyss of Thy judgments? For long, sore sick of a fever, he lay senseless 
in a death-sweat; and his recovery being despaired of, he was baptised, 
unknowing; myself meanwhile little regarding, and presuming that his 
soul would retain rather what it had received of me, not what was 
wrought on his unconscious body. But it proved far otherwise: for 
he was refreshed, and restored. Forthwith, as soon as I could speak 
with him (and I could, so soon as he was able, for I never left him, 
and we hung but too much upon each other), I essayed to jest with 
him, as though he would jest with me at that baptism which he had 
received, when utterly absent in mind and feeling, but had now understood 
that he had received. But he so shrunk from me, as from an enemy; 
and with a wonderful and sudden freedom bade me, as I would continue 
his friend, forbear such language to him. I, all astonished and amazed, 
suppressed all my emotions till he should grow well, and his health 
were strong enough for me to deal with him as I would. But he was 
taken away from my frenzy, that with Thee he might be preserved for 
my comfort; a few days after in my absence, he was attacked again 
by the fever, and so departed. 

4.4.9
     At this grief my heart was utterly darkened; and whatever I beheld 
was death. My native country was a torment to me, and my father's 
house a strange unhappiness; and whatever I had shared with him, wanting 
him, became a distracting torture. Mine eyes sought him every where, 
but he was not granted them; and I hated all places, for that they 
had not him; nor could they now tell me, "he is coming," as when he 
was alive and absent. I became a great riddle to myself, and I asked 
my soul, why she was so sad, and why she disquieted me sorely: but 
she knew not what to answer me. And if I said, Trust in God, she very 
rightly obeyed me not; because that most dear friend, whom she had 
lost, was, being man, both truer and better than that phantasm she 
was bid to trust in. Only tears were sweet to me, for they succeeded 
my friend, in the dearest of my affections. 

4.5.10
     And now, Lord, these things are passed by, and time hath assuaged 
my wound. May I learn from Thee, who art Truth, and approach the ear 
of my heart unto Thy mouth, that Thou mayest tell me why weeping is 
sweet to the miserable? Hast Thou, although present every where, cast 
away our misery far from Thee? And Thou abidest in Thyself, but we 
are tossed about in divers trials. And yet unless we mourned in Thine 
ears, we should have no hope left. Whence then is sweet fruit gathered 
from the bitterness of life, from groaning, tears, sighs, and complaints? 
Doth this sweeten it, that we hope Thou hearest? This is true of prayer, 
for therein is a longing to approach unto Thee. But is it also in 
grief for a thing lost, and the sorrow wherewith I was then overwhelmed? 
For I neither hoped he should return to life nor did I desire this 
with my tears; but I wept only and grieved. For I was miserable, and 
had lost my joy. Or is weeping indeed a bitter thing, and for very 
loathing of the things which we before enjoyed, does it then, when 
we shrink from them, please us? 

4.6.11
     But what speak I of these things? for now is no time to question, 
but to confess unto Thee. Wretched I was; and wretched is every soul 
bound by the friendship of perishable things; he is torn asunder when 
he loses them, and then he feels the wretchedness which he had ere 
yet he lost them. So was it then with me; I wept most bitterly, and 
found my repose in bitterness. Thus was I wretched, and that wretched 
life I held dearer than my friend. For though I would willingly have 
changed it, yet was I more unwilling to part with it than with him; 
yea, I know not whether I would have parted with it even for him, 
as is related (if not feigned) of Pylades and Orestes, that they would 
gladly have died for each other or together, not to live together 
being to them worse than death. But in me there had arisen some unexplained 
feeling, too contrary to this, for at once I loathed exceedingly to 
live and feared to die. I suppose, the more I loved him, the more 
did I hate, and fear (as a most cruel enemy) death, which had bereaved 
me of him: and I imagined it would speedily make an end of all men, 
since it had power over him. Thus was it with me, I remember. Behold 
my heart, O my God, behold and see into me; for well I remember it, 
O my Hope, who cleansest me from the impurity of such affections, 
directing mine eyes towards Thee, and plucking my feet out of the 
snare. For I wondered that others, subject to death, did live, since 
he whom I loved, as if he should never die, was dead; and I wondered 
yet more that myself, who was to him a second self, could live, he 
being dead. Well said one of his friend, "Thou half of my soul"; for 
I felt that my soul and his soul were "one soul in two bodies": and 
therefore was my life a horror to me, because I would not live halved. 
And therefore perchance I feared to die, lest he whom I had much loved 
should die wholly. 

4.7.12
     O madness, which knowest not how to love men, like men! O foolish 
man that I then was, enduring impatiently the lot of man! I fretted 
then, sighed, wept, was distracted; had neither rest nor counsel. 
For I bore about a shattered and bleeding soul, impatient of being 
borne by me, yet where to repose it, I found not. Not in calm groves, 
not in games and music, nor in fragrant spots, nor in curious banquetings, 
nor in the pleasures of the bed and the couch; nor (finally) in books 
or poesy, found it repose. All things looked ghastly, yea, the very 
light; whatsoever was not what he was, was revolting and hateful, 
except groaning and tears. For in those alone found I a little refreshment. 
But when my soul was withdrawn from them a huge load of misery weighed 
me down. To Thee, O Lord, it ought to have been raised, for Thee to 
lighten; I knew it; but neither could nor would; the more, since, 
when I thought of Thee, Thou wert not to me any solid or substantial 
thing. For Thou wert not Thyself, but a mere phantom, and my error 
was my God. If I offered to discharge my load thereon, that it might 
rest, it glided through the void, and came rushing down again on me; 
and I had remained to myself a hapless spot, where I could neither 
be, nor be from thence. For whither should my heart flee from my heart? 
Whither should I flee from myself? Whither not follow myself? And 
yet I fled out of my country; for so should mine eyes less look for 
him, where they were not wont to see him. And thus from Thagaste, 
I came to Carthage. 

4.8.13
     Times lose no time; nor do they roll idly by; through our senses 
they work strange operations on the mind. Behold, they went and came 
day by day, and by coming and going, introduced into my mind other 
imaginations and other remembrances; and little by little patched 
me up again with my old kind of delights, unto which that my sorrow 
gave way. And yet there succeeded, not indeed other griefs, yet the 
causes of other griefs. For whence had that former grief so easily 
reached my very inmost soul, but that I had poured out my soul upon 
the dust, in loving one that must die, as if he would never die? For 
what restored and refreshed me chiefly was the solaces of other friends, 
with whom I did love, what instead of Thee I loved; and this was a 
great fable, and protracted lie, by whose adulterous stimulus, our 
soul, which lay itching in our ears, was being defiled. But that fable 
would not die to me, so oft as any of my friends died. There were 
other things which in them did more take my mind; to talk and jest 
together, to do kind offices by turns; to read together honied books; 
to play the fool or be earnest together; to dissent at times without 
discontent, as a man might with his own self; and even with the seldomness 
of these dissentings, to season our more frequent consentings; sometimes 
to teach, and sometimes learn; long for the absent with impatience; 
and welcome the coming with joy. These and the like expressions, proceeding 
out of the hearts of those that loved and were loved again, by the 
countenance, the tongue, the eyes, and a thousand pleasing gestures, 
were so much fuel to melt our souls together, and out of many make 
but one. 

4.9.14
     This is it that is loved in friends; and so loved, that a man's 
conscience condemns itself, if he love not him that loves him again, 
or love not again him that loves him, looking for nothing from his 
person but indications of his love. Hence that mourning, if one die, 
and darkenings of sorrows, that steeping of the heart in tears, all 
sweetness turned to bitterness; and upon the loss of life of the dying, 
the death of the living. Blessed whoso loveth Thee, and his friend 
in Thee, and his enemy for Thee. For he alone loses none dear to him, 
to whom all are dear in Him who cannot be lost. And who is this but 
our God, the God that made heaven and earth, and filleth them, because 
by filling them He created them? Thee none loseth, but who leaveth. 
And who leaveth Thee, whither goeth or whither teeth he, but from 
Thee well-pleased, to Thee displeased? For where doth he not find 
Thy law in his own punishment? And Thy law is truth, and truth Thou. 

4.10.15
     Turn us, O God of Hosts, show us Thy countenance, and we shall 
be whole. For whithersoever the soul of man turns itself, unless toward 
Thee, it is riveted upon sorrows, yea though it is riveted on things 
beautiful. And yet they, out of Thee, and out of the soul, were not, 
unless they were from Thee. They rise, and set; and by rising, they 
begin as it were to be; they grow, that they may be perfected; and 
perfected, they wax old and wither; and all grow not old, but all 
wither. So then when they rise and tend to be, the more quickly they 
grow that they may be, so much the more they haste not to be. This 
is the law of them. Thus much has Thou allotted them, because they 
are portions of things, which exist not all at once, but by passing 
away and succeeding, they together complete that universe, whereof 
they are portions. And even thus is our speech completed by signs 
giving forth a sound: but this again is not perfected unless one word 
pass away when it hath sounded its part, that another may succeed. 
Out of all these things let my soul praise Thee, O God, Creator of 
all; yet let not my soul be riveted unto these things with the glue 
of love, through the senses of the body. For they go whither they 
were to go, that they might not be; and they rend her with pestilent 
longings, because she longs to be, yet loves to repose in what she 
loves. But in these things is no place of repose; they abide not, 
they flee; and who can follow them with the senses of the flesh? yea, 
who can grasp them, when they are hard by? For the sense of the flesh 
is slow, because it is the sense of the flesh; and thereby is it bounded. 
It sufficeth for that it was made for; but it sufficeth not to stay 
things running their course from their appointed starting-place to 
the end appointed. For in Thy Word, by which they are created, they 
hear their decree, "hence and hitherto." 

4.11.16
     Be not foolish, O my soul, nor become deaf in the ear of thine 
heart with the tumult of thy folly. Hearken thou too.  The Word itself 
calleth thee to return: and there is the place of rest imperturbable, 
where love is not forsaken, if itself forsaketh not. Behold, these 
things pass away, that others may replace them, and so this lower 
universe be completed by all his parts. But do I depart any whither? 
saith the Word of God. There fix thy dwelling, trust there whatsoever 
thou hast thence, O my soul, at least now thou art tired out with 
vanities. Entrust Truth, whatsoever thou hast from the Truth, and 
thou shalt lose nothing; and thy decay shall bloom again, and all 
thy diseases be healed, and thy mortal parts be reformed and renewed, 
and bound around thee: nor shall they lay thee whither themselves 
descend; but they shall stand fast with thee, and abide for ever before 
God, Who abideth and standeth fast for ever. 

4.11.17
     Why then be perverted and follow thy flesh? Be it converted and 
follow thee. Whatever by her thou hast sense of, is in part; and the 
whole, whereof these are parts, thou knowest not; and yet they delight 
thee. But had the sense of thy flesh a capacity for comprehending 
the whole, and not itself also, for thy punishment, been justly restricted 
to a part of the whole, thou wouldest, that whatsoever existeth at 
this present, should pass away, that so the whole might better please 
thee. For what we speak also, by the same sense of the flesh thou 
hearest; yet wouldest not thou have the syllables stay, but fly away, 
that others may come, and thou hear the whole. And so ever, when any 
one thing is made up of many, all of which do not exist together, 
all collectively would please more than they do severally, could all 
be perceived collectively. But far better than these is He who made 
all; and He is our God, nor doth He pass away, for neither doth aught 
succeed Him. 

4.12.18
     If bodies please thee, praise God on occasion of them, and turn 
back thy love upon their Maker; lest in these things which please 
thee, thou displease. If souls please thee, be they loved in God: 
for they too are mutable, but in Him are they firmly stablished; else 
would they pass, and pass away. In Him then be they beloved; and carry 
unto Him along with thee what souls thou canst, and say to them, "Him 
let us love, Him let us love: He made these, nor is He far off. For 
He did not make them, and so depart, but they are of Him, and in Him. 
See there He is, where truth is loved. He is within the very heart, 
yet hath the heart strayed from Him. Go back into your heart, ye transgressors, 
and cleave fast to Him that made you. Stand with Him, and ye shall 
stand fast. Rest in Him, and ye shall be at rest. Whither go ye in 
rough ways? Whither go ye? The good that you love is from Him; but 
it is good and pleasant through reference to Him, and justly shall 
it be embittered, because unjustly is any thing loved which is from 
Him, if He be forsaken for it. To what end then would ye still and 
still walk these difficult and toilsome ways? There is no rest, where 
ye seek it. Seek what ye seek; but it is not there where ye seek. 
Ye seek a blessed life in the land of death; it is not there. For 
how should there be a blessed life where life itself is not? 

4.12.19
     "But our true Life came down hither, and bore our death, and 
slew him, out of the abundance of His own life: and He thundered, 
calling aloud to us to return hence to Him into that secret place, 
whence He came forth to us, first into the Virgin's womb, wherein 
He espoused the human creation, our mortal flesh, that it might not 
be for ever mortal, and thence like a bridegroom coming out of his 
chamber, rejoicing as a giant to run his course. For He lingered not, 
but ran, calling aloud by words, deeds, death, life, descent, ascension; 
crying aloud to us to return unto Him. And He departed from our eyes, 
that we might return into our heart, and there find Him. For He departed, 
and to, He is here. He would not be long with us, yet left us not; 
for He departed thither, whence He never parted, because the world 
was made by Him. And in this world He was, and into this world He 
came to save sinners, unto whom my soul confesseth, and He healeth 
it, for it hath sinned against Him. O ye sons of men, how long so 
slow of heart? Even now, after the descent of Life to you, will ye 
not ascend and live? But whither ascend ye, when ye are on high, and 
set your mouth against the heavens? Descend, that ye may ascend, and 
ascend to God. For ye have fallen, by ascending against Him." Tell 
them this, that they may weep in the valley of tears, and so carry 
them up with thee unto God; because out of His spirit thou speakest 
thus unto them, if thou speakest, burning with the fire of charity. 

4.13.20
     These things I then knew not, and I loved these lower beauties, 
and I was sinking to the very depths, and to my friends I said, "Do 
we love any thing but the beautiful? What then is the beautiful? and 
what is beauty? What is it that attracts and wins us to the things 
we love? for unless there were in them a grace and beauty, they could 
by no means draw us unto them." And I marked and perceived that in 
bodies themselves, there was a beauty, from their forming a sort of 
whole, and again, another from apt and mutual correspondence, as of 
a part of the body with its whole, or a shoe with a foot, and the 
like. And this consideration sprang up in my mind, out of my inmost 
heart, and I wrote "on the fair and fit," I think, two or three books. 
Thou knowest, O Lord, for it is gone from me; for I have them not, 
but they are strayed from me, I know not how. 

4.14.21
     But what moved me, O Lord my God, to dedicate these books unto 
Hierius, an orator of Rome, whom I knew not by face, but loved for 
the fame of his learning which was eminent in him, and some words 
of his I had heard, which pleased me? But more did he please me, for 
that he pleased others, who highly extolled him, amazed that out of 
a Syrian, first instructed in Greek eloquence, should afterwards be 
formed a wonderful Latin orator, and one most learned in things pertaining 
unto philosophy. One is commended, and, unseen, he is loved: doth 
this love enter the heart of the hearer from the mouth of the commender? 
Not so. But by one who loveth is another kindled. For hence he is 
loved who is commended, when the commender is believed to extol him 
with an unfeigned heart; that is, when one that loves him, praises 
him. 

4.14.22
     For so did I then love men, upon the judgment of men, not Thine, 
O my God, in Whom no man is deceived. But yet why not for qualities, 
like those of a famous charioteer, or fighter with beasts in the theatre, 
known far and wide by a vulgar popularity, but far otherwise, and 
earnestly, and so as I would be myself commended? For I would not 
be commended or loved, as actors are (though I myself did commend 
and love them), but had rather be unknown, than so known; and even 
hated, than so loved. Where now are the impulses to such various and 
divers kinds of loves laid up in one soul? Why, since we are equally 
men, do I love in another what, if I did not hate, I should not spurn 
and cast from myself? For it holds not, that as a good horse is loved 
by him, who would not, though he might, be that horse, therefore the 
same may be said of an actor, who shares our nature. Do I then love 
in a man, what I hate to be, who am a man? Man himself is a great 
deep, whose very hairs Thou numberest, O Lord, and they fall not to 
the ground without Thee. And yet are the hairs of his head easier 
to be numbered than his feelings, and the beatings of his heart. 

4.14.23
     But that orator was of that sort whom I loved, as wishing to 
be myself such; and I erred through a swelling pride, and was tossed 
about with every wind, but yet was steered by Thee, though very secretly. 
And whence do I know, and whence do I confidently confess unto Thee, 
that I had loved him more for the love of his commenders, than for 
the very things for which he was commended? Because, had he been unpraised, 
and these self-same men had dispraised him, and with dispraise and 
contempt told the very same things of him, I had never been so kindled 
and excited to love him. And yet the things had not been other, nor 
he himself other; but only the feelings of the relators. See where 
the impotent soul lies along, that is not yet stayed up by the solidity 
of truth! Just as the gales of tongues blow from the breast of the 
opinionative, so is it carried this way and that, driven forward and 
backward, and the light is overclouded to it, and the truth unseen. 
And to, it is before us. And it was to me a great matter, that my 
discourse and labours should be known to that man: which should he 
approve, I were the more kindled; but if he disapproved, my empty 
heart, void of Thy solidity, had been wounded. And yet the "fair and 
fit," whereon I wrote to him, I dwelt on with pleasure, and surveyed 
it, and admired it, though none joined therein. 

4.15.24
     But I saw not yet, whereon this weighty matter turned in Thy 
wisdom, O Thou Omnipotent, who only doest wonders; and my mind ranged 
through corporeal forms; and "fair," I defined and distinguished what 
is so in itself, and "fit," whose beauty is in correspondence to some 
other thing: and this I supported by corporeal examples. And I turned 
to the nature of the mind, but the false notion which I had of spiritual 
things, let me not see the truth. Yet the force of truth did of itself 
flash into mine eyes, and I turned away my panting soul from incorporeal 
substance to lineaments, and colours, and bulky magnitudes. And not 
being able to see these in the mind, I thought I could not see my 
mind. And whereas in virtue I loved peace, and in viciousness I abhorred 
discord; in the first I observed a unity, but in the other, a sort 
of division. And in that unity I conceived the rational soul, and 
the nature of truth and of the chief good to consist; but in this 
division I miserably imagined there to be some unknown substance of 
irrational life, and the nature of the chief evil, which should not 
only be a substance, but real life also, and yet not derived from 
Thee, O my God, of whom are all things. And yet that first I called 
a Monad, as it had been a soul without sex; but the latter a Duad; 
-anger, in deeds of violence, and in flagitiousness, lust; not knowing 
whereof I spake. For I had not known or learned that neither was evil 
a substance, nor our soul that chief and unchangeable good. 

4.15.25
     For as deeds of violence arise, if that emotion of the soul be 
corrupted, whence vehement action springs, stirring itself insolently 
and unrulily; and lusts, when that affection of the soul is ungoverned, 
whereby carnal pleasures are drunk in, so do errors and false opinions 
defile the conversation, if the reasonable soul itself be corrupted; 
as it was then in me, who knew not that it must be enlightened by 
another light, that it may be partaker of truth, seeing itself is 
not that nature of truth. For Thou shalt light my candle, O Lord my 
God, Thou shalt enlighten my darkness: and of Thy fulness have we 
all received, for Thou art the true light that lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world; for in Thee there is no variableness, 
neither shadow of change. 

4.15.26
     But I pressed towards Thee, and was thrust from Thee, that I 
might taste of death: for thou resistest the proud. But what prouder, 
than for me with a strange madness to maintain myself to be that by 
nature which Thou art? For whereas I was subject to change (so much 
being manifest to me, my very desire to become wise, being the wish, 
of worse to become better), yet chose I rather to imagine Thee subject 
to change, and myself not to be that which Thou art. Therefore I was 
repelled by Thee, and Thou resistedst my vain stiffneckedness, and 
I imagined corporeal forms, and, myself flesh, I accused flesh; and, 
a wind that passeth away, I returned not to Thee, but I passed on 
and on to things which have no being, neither in Thee, nor in me, 
nor in the body. Neither were they created for me by Thy truth, but 
by my vanity devised out of things corporeal. And I was wont to ask 
Thy faithful little ones, my fellow-citizens (from whom, unknown to 
myself, I stood exiled), I was wont, prating and foolishly, to ask 
them, "Why then doth the soul err which God created?" But I would 
not be asked, "Why then doth God err?" And I maintained that Thy 
unchangeable substance did err upon constraint, rather than confess 
that my changeable substance had gone astray voluntarily, and now, 
in punishment, lay in error. 

4.15.27
     I was then some six or seven and twenty years old when I wrote 
those volumes; revolving within me corporeal fictions, buzzing in 
the ears of my heart, which I turned, O sweet truth, to thy inward 
melody, meditating on the "fair and fit," and longing to stand and 
hearken to Thee, and to rejoice greatly at the Bridegroom's voice, 
but could not; for by the voices of mine own errors, I was hurried 
abroad, and through the weight of my own pride, I was sinking into 
the lowest pit. For Thou didst not make me to hear joy and gladness, 
nor did the bones exult which were not yet humbled. 

4.16.28
     And what did it profit me, that scarce twenty years old, a book of
Aristotle, which they call the often Predicaments, falling into my hands
(on whose very name I hung, as on something great and divine, so often as
my rhetoric master of Carthage, and others, accounted learned, mouthed it
with cheeks bursting with pride), I read and understood it unaided? And on
my conferring with others, who said that they scarcely understood it with
very able tutors, not only orally explaining it, but drawing many things
in sand, they could tell me no more of it than I had learned, reading it
by myself. And the book appeared to me to speak very clearly of
substances, such as "man," and of their qualities, as the figure of a man,
of what sort it is;  and stature, how many feet high; and his
relationship, whose brother he is; or where placed; or when born; or
whether he stands or sits; or be shod or armed; or does, or suffers
anything; and all the innumerable things which might be ranged under these
nine Predicaments, of which I have given some specimens, or under that
chief Predicament of Substance. 

4.16.29
     What did all this further me, seeing it even hindered me? when, 
imagining whatever was, was comprehended under those often Predicaments, 
I essayed in such wise to understand, O my God, Thy wonderful and 
unchangeable Unity also, as if Thou also hadst been subjected to Thine 
own greatness or beauty; so that (as in bodies) they should exist 
in Thee, as their subject: whereas Thou Thyself art Thy greatness 
and beauty; but a body is not great or fair in that it is a body, 
seeing that, though it were less great or fair, it should notwithstanding 
be a body. But it was falsehood which of Thee I conceived, not truth, 
fictions of my misery, not the realities of Thy blessedness. For Thou 
hadst commanded, and it was done in me, that the earth should bring 
forth briars and thorns to me, and that in the sweat of my brows I 
should eat my bread. 

4.16.30
     And what did it profit me, that all the books I could procure 
of the so-called liberal arts, I, the vile slave of vile affections, 
read by myself, and understood? And I delighted in them, but knew 
not whence came all, that therein was true or certain. For I had my 
back to the light, and my face to the things enlightened; whence my 
face, with which I discerned the things enlightened, itself was not 
enlightened. Whatever was written, either on rhetoric, or logic, geometry, 
music, and arithmetic, by myself without much difficulty or any instructor, 
I understood, Thou knowest, O Lord my God; because both quickness 
of understanding, and acuteness in discerning, is Thy gift: yet did 
I not thence sacrifice to Thee. So then it served not to my use, but 
rather to my perdition, since I went about to get so good a portion 
of my substance into my own keeping; and I kept not my strength for 
Thee, but wandered from Thee into a far country, to spend it upon 
harlotries. For what profited me good abilities, not employed to good 
uses? For I felt not that those arts were attained with great difficulty, 
even by the studious and talented, until I attempted to explain them 
to such; when he most excelled in them who followed me not altogether 
slowly. 

4.16.31
     But what did this further me, imagining that Thou, O Lord God, 
the Truth, wert a vast and bright body, and I a fragment of that body? 
Perverseness too great! But such was I. Nor do I blush, O my God, 
to confess to Thee Thy mercies towards me, and to call upon Thee, 
who blushed not then to profess to men my blasphemies, and to bark 
against Thee. What profited me then my nimble wit in those sciences 
and all those most knotty volumes, unravelied by me, without aid from 
human instruction; seeing I erred so foully, and with such sacrilegious 
shamefulness, in the doctrine of piety? Or what hindrance was a far 
slower wit to Thy little ones, since they departed not far from Thee, 
that in the nest of Thy Church they might securely be fledged, and 
nourish the wings of charity, by the food of a sound faith. O Lord 
our God, under the shadow of Thy wings let us hope; protect us, and 
carry us. Thou wilt carry us both when little, and even to hoar hairs 
wilt Thou carry us; for our firmness, when it is Thou, then is it 
firmness; but when our own, it is infirmity. Our good ever lives with 
Thee; from which when we turn away, we are turned aside. Let us now, 
O Lord, return, that we may not be overturned, because with Thee our 
good lives without any decay, which good art Thou; nor need we fear, 
lest there be no place whither to return, because we fell from it: 
for through our absence, our mansion fell not- Thy eternity.

