BOOK 2

2.1.1
      I will now call to mind my past foulness, and the carnal corruptions 
of my soul; not because I love them, but that I may love Thee, O my 
God. For love of Thy love I do it; reviewing my most wicked ways in 
the very bitterness of my remembrance, that Thou mayest grow sweet 
unto me (Thou sweetness never failing, Thou blissful and assured sweetness); 
and gathering me again out of that my dissipation, wherein I was torn 
piecemeal, while turned from Thee, the One Good, I lost myself among 
a multiplicity of things. For I even burnt in my youth heretofore, 
to be satiated in things below; and I dared to grow wild again, with 
these various and shadowy loves: my beauty consumed away, and I stank 
in Thine eyes; pleasing myself, and desirous to please in the eyes 
of men. 

2.2.2
     And what was it that I delighted in, but to love, and be loved? 
but I kept not the measure of love, of mind to mind, friendship's 
bright boundary: but out of the muddy concupiscence of the flesh, 
and the bubblings of youth, mists fumed up which beclouded and overcast 
my heart, that I could not discern the clear brightness of love from 
the fog of lustfulness. Both did confusedly boil in me, and hurried 
my unstayed youth over the precipice of unholy desires, and sunk me 
in a gulf of flagitiousnesses. Thy wrath had gathered over me, and 
I knew it not. I was grown deaf by the clanking of the chain of my 
mortality, the punishment of the pride of my soul, and I strayed further 
from Thee, and Thou lettest me alone, and I was tossed about, and 
wasted, and dissipated, and I boiled over in my fornications, and 
Thou heldest Thy peace, O Thou my tardy joy! Thou then heldest Thy 
peace, and I wandered further and further from Thee, into more and 
more fruitless seed-plots of sorrows, with a proud dejectedness, and 
a restless weariness. 

2.2.3
     Oh! that some one had then attempered my disorder, and turned 
to account the fleeting beauties of these, the extreme points of Thy 
creation! had put a bound to their pleasureableness, that so the tides 
of my youth might have cast themselves upon the marriage shore, if 
they could not be calmed, and kept within the object of a family, 
as Thy law prescribes, O Lord: who this way formest the offspring 
of this our death, being able with a gentle hand to blunt the thorns 
which were excluded from Thy paradise? For Thy omnipotency is not 
far from us, even when we be far from Thee. Else ought I more watchfully 
to have heeded the voice from the clouds: Nevertheless such shall 
have trouble in the flesh, but I spare you. And it is good for a man 
not to touch a woman. And, he that is unmarried thinketh of the things 
of the Lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is married careth 
for the things of this world, how he may please his wife. 
     To these words I should have listened more attentively, and being 
severed for the kingdom of heaven's sake, had more happily awaited 
Thy embraces; 

2.2.4
but I, poor wretch, foamed like a troubled sea, following the rushing 
of my own tide, forsaking Thee, and exceeded all Thy limits; yet I 
escaped not Thy scourges. For what mortal can? For Thou wert ever 
with me mercifully rigorous, and besprinkling with most bitter alloy 
all my unlawful pleasures: that I might seek pleasures without alloy. 
But where to find such, I could not discover, save in Thee, O Lord, 
who teachest by sorrow, and woundest us, to heal; and killest us, 
lest we die from Thee. Where was I, and how far was I exiled from 
the delights of Thy house, in that sixteenth year of the age of my 
flesh, when the madness of lust (to which human shamelessness giveth 
free licence, though unlicensed by Thy laws) took the rule over me, 
and I resigned myself wholly to it? My friends meanwhile took no care 
by marriage to save my fall; their only care was that I should learn 
to speak excellently, and be a persuasive orator. 

2.3.5
     For that year were my studies intermitted: whilst after my return 
from Madaura (a neighbour city, whither I had journeyed to learn grammar 
and rhetoric), the expenses for a further journey to Carthage were 
being provided for me; and that rather by the resolution than the 
means of my father, who was but a poor freeman of Thagaste. To whom 
tell I this? not to Thee, my God; but before Thee to mine own kind, 
even to that small portion of mankind as may light upon these writings 
of mine. And to what purpose? that whosoever reads this, may think 
out of what depths we are to cry unto Thee. For what is nearer to 
Thine ears than a confessing heart, and a life of faith? Who did not 
extol my father, for that beyond the ability of his means, he would 
furnish his son with all necessaries for a far journey for his studies' 
sake? For many far abler citizens did no such thing for their children. 
But yet this same father had no concern how I grew towards Thee, or 
how chaste I were; so that I were but copious in speech, however barren 
I were to Thy culture, O God, who art the only true and good Lord 
of Thy field, my heart.  

2.3.6
     But while in that my sixteenth year I lived with my parents, 
leaving all school for a while (a season of idleness being interposed 
through the narrowness of my parents' fortunes), the briers of unclean 
desires grew rank over my head, and there was no hand to root them 
out. When that my father saw me at the baths, now growing towards 
manhood, and endued with a restless youthfulness, he, as already hence 
anticipating his descendants, gladly told it to my mother; rejoicing 
in that tumult of the senses wherein the world forgetteth Thee its 
Creator, and becometh enamoured of Thy creature, instead of Thyself, 
through the fumes of that invisible wine of its self-will, turning 
aside and bowing down to the very basest things. But in my mother's 
breast Thou hadst already begun Thy temple, and the foundation of 
Thy holy habitation, whereas my father was as yet but a Catechumen, 
and that but recently. She then was startled with a holy fear and 
trembling; and though I was not as yet baptised, feared for me those 
crooked ways in which they walk who turn their back to Thee, and not 
their face. 

2.3.7
     Woe is me! and dare I say that Thou heldest Thy peace, O my God, 
while I wandered further from Thee? Didst Thou then indeed hold Thy 
peace to me? And whose but Thine were these words which by my mother, 
Thy faithful one, Thou sangest in my ears? Nothing whereof sunk into 
my heart, so as to do it. For she wished, and I remember in private 
with great anxiety warned me, "not to commit fornication; but especially 
never to defile another man's wife." These seemed to me womanish advices, 
which I should blush to obey. But they were Thine, and I knew it not: 
and I thought Thou wert silent and that it was she who spake; by whom 
Thou wert not silent unto me; and in her wast despised by me, her 
son, the son of Thy handmaid, Thy servant. But I knew it not; and 
ran headlong with such blindness, that amongst my equals I was ashamed 
of a less shamelessness, when I heard them boast of their flagitiousness, 
yea, and the more boasting, the more they were degraded: and I took 
pleasure, not only in the pleasure of the deed, but in the praise. 
What is worthy of dispraise but vice? But I made myself worse than 
I was, that I might not be dispraised; and when in any thing I had 
not sinned as the abandoned ones, I would say that I had done what 
I had not done, that I might not seem contemptible in proportion as 
I was innocent; or of less account, the more chaste. 

2.3.8
     Behold with what companions I walked the streets of Babylon, 
and wallowed in the mire thereof, as if in a bed of spices and precious 
ointments. And that I might cleave the faster to its very centre, 
the invisible enemy trod me down, and seduced me, for that I was easy 
to be seduced. Neither did the mother of my flesh (who had now fled 
out of the centre of Babylon, yet went more slowly in the skirts thereof 
as she advised me to chastity, so heed what she had heard of me from 
her husband, as to restrain within the bounds of conjugal affection 
(if it could not be pared away to the quick) what she felt to be pestilent 
at present and for the future dangerous. She heeded not this, for 
she feared lest a wife should prove a clog and hindrance to my hopes. 
Not those hopes of the world to come, which my mother reposed in Thee; 
but the hope of learning, which both my parents were too desirous 
I should attain; my father, because he had next to no thought of Thee, 
and of me but vain conceits; my mother, because she accounted that 
those usual courses of learning would not only be no hindrance, but 
even some furtherance towards attaining Thee. For thus I conjecture, 
recalling, as well as I may, the disposition of my parents. The reins, 
meantime, were slackened to me, beyond all temper of due severity, 
to spend my time in sport, yea, even unto dissoluteness in whatsoever 
I affected. And in all was a mist, intercepting from me, O my God, 
the brightness of Thy truth; and mine iniquity burst out as from very 
fatness. 

2.4.9
     Theft is punished by Thy law, O Lord, and the law written in 
the hearts of men, which iniquity itself effaces not. For what thief 
will abide a thief? not even a rich thief, one stealing through want. 
Yet I lusted to thieve, and did it, compelled by no hunger, nor poverty, 
but through a cloyedness of well-doing, and a pamperedness of iniquity. 
For I stole that, of which I had enough, and much better. Nor cared 
I to enjoy what I stole, but joyed in the theft and sin itself. A 
pear tree there was near our vineyard, laden with fruit, tempting 
neither for colour nor taste. To shake and rob this, some lewd young 
fellows of us went, late one night (having according to our pestilent 
custom prolonged our sports in the streets till then), and took huge 
loads, not for our eating, but to fling to the very hogs, having only 
tasted them. And this, but to do what we liked only, because it was 
misliked. Behold my heart, O God, behold my heart, which Thou hadst 
pity upon in the bottom of the bottomless pit. Now, behold, let my 
heart tell Thee what it sought there, that I should be gratuitously 
evil, having no temptation to ill, but the ill itself. It was foul, 
and I loved it; I loved to perish, I loved mine own fault, not that 
for which I was faulty, but my fault itself. Foul soul, falling from 
Thy firmament to utter destruction; not seeking aught through the 
shame, but the shame itself! 

2.5.10
     For there is an attractiveness in beautiful bodies, in gold and 
silver, and all things; and in bodily touch, sympathy hath much influence, 
and each other sense hath his proper object answerably tempered. Wordly 
honour hath also its grace, and the power of overcoming, and of mastery; 
whence springs also the thirst of revenge. But yet, to obtain all 
these, we may not depart from Thee, O Lord, nor decline from Thy law. 
The life also which here we live hath its own enchantment, through 
a certain proportion of its own, and a correspondence with all things 
beautiful here below. Human friendship also is endeared with a sweet 
tie, by reason of the unity formed of many souls. Upon occasion of 
all these, and the like, is sin committed, while through an immoderate 
inclination towards these goods of the lowest order, the better and 
higher are forsaken,- Thou, our Lord God, Thy truth, and Thy law. 
For these lower things have their delights, but not like my God, who 
made all things; for in Him doth the righteous delight, and He is 
the joy of the upright in heart.  

2.5.11
     When, then, we ask why a crime was done, we believe it not, unless 
it appear that there might have been some desire of obtaining some 
of those which we called lower goods, or a fear of losing them. For 
they are beautiful and comely; although compared with those higher 
and beatific goods, they be abject and low. A man hath murdered another; 
why? he loved his wife or his estate; or would rob for his own livelihood; 
or feared to lose some such things by him; or, wronged, was on fire 
to be revenged. Would any commit murder upon no cause, delighted simply 
in murdering? who would believe it? for as for that furious and savage 
man, of whom it is said that he was gratuitously evil and cruel, yet 
is the cause assigned; "lest" (saith he) "through idleness hand or 
heart should grow inactive." And to what end? that, through that practice 
of guilt, he might, having taken the city, attain to honours, empire, 
riches, and be freed from fear of the laws, and his embarrassments 
from domestic needs, and consciousness of villainies. So then, not 
even Catiline himself loved his own villainies, but something else, 
for whose sake he did them. 

2.6.12
     What then did wretched I so love in thee, thou theft of mine, 
thou deed of darkness, in that sixteenth year of my age? Lovely thou 
wert not, because thou wert theft. But art thou any thing, that thus 
I speak to thee? Fair were the pears we stole, because they were Thy 
creation, Thou fairest of all, Creator of all, Thou good God; God, 
the sovereign good and my true good. Fair were those pears, but not 
them did my wretched soul desire; for I had store of better, and those 
I gathered, only that I might steal. For, when gathered, I flung them 
away, my only feast therein being my own sin, which I was pleased 
to enjoy. For if aught of those pears came within my mouth, what sweetened 
it was the sin. And now, O Lord my God, I enquire what in that theft 
delighted me; and behold it hath no loveliness; I mean not such loveliness 
as in justice and wisdom; nor such as is in the mind and memory, and 
senses, and animal life of man; nor yet as the stars are glorious 
and beautiful in their orbs; or the earth, or sea, full of embryo--
life, replacing by its birth that which decayeth; nay, nor even that 
false and shadowy beauty which belongeth to deceiving vices. 

2.6.13
     For so doth pride imitate exaltedness; whereas Thou alone art 
God exalted over all. Ambition, what seeks it, but honours and glory? 
whereas Thou alone art to be honoured above all, and glorious for 
evermore. The cruelty of the great would fain be feared; but who is 
to be feared but God alone, out of whose power what can be wrested 
or withdrawn? when, or where, or whither, or by whom? The tendernesses 
of the wanton would fain be counted love: yet is nothing more tender 
than Thy charity; nor is aught loved more healthfully than that Thy 
truth, bright and beautiful above all. Curiosity makes semblance of 
a desire of knowledge; whereas Thou supremely knowest all. Yea, ignorance 
and foolishness itself is cloaked under the name of simplicity and 
uninjuriousness; because nothing is found more single than Thee: and 
what less injurious, since they are his own works which injure the 
sinner? Yea, sloth would fain be at rest; but what stable rest besides 
the Lord? Luxury affects to be called plenty and abundance; but Thou 
art the fulness and never-failing plenteousness of incorruptible pleasures. 
Prodigality presents a shadow of liberality: but Thou art the most 
overflowing Giver of all good. Covetousness would possess many things; 
and Thou possessest all things. Envy disputes for excellency: what 
more excellent than Thou? Anger seeks revenge: who revenges more justly 
than Thou? Fear startles at things unwonted and sudden, which endangers 
things beloved, and takes forethought for their safety; but to Thee 
what unwonted or sudden, or who separateth from Thee what Thou lovest? 
Or where but with Thee is unshaken safety? Grief pines away for things 
lost, the delight of its desires; because it would have nothing taken 
from it, as nothing can from Thee. 

2.6.14
     Thus doth the soul commit fornication, when she turns from Thee, 
seeking without Thee, what she findeth not pure and untainted, till 
she returns to Thee. Thus all pervertedly imitate Thee, who remove 
far from Thee, and lift themselves up against Thee. But even by thus 
imitating Thee, they imply Thee to be the Creator of all nature; whence 
there is no place whither altogether to retire from Thee. What then 
did I love in that theft? and wherein did I even corruptly and pervertedly 
imitate my Lord? Did I wish even by stealth to do contrary to Thy 
law, because by power I could not, so that being a prisoner, I might 
mimic a maimed liberty by doing with impunity things unpermitted me, 
a darkened likeness of Thy Omnipotency? Behold, Thy servant, fleeing 
from his Lord, and obtaining a shadow. O rottenness, O monstrousness 
of life, and depth of death! could I like what I might not, only because 
I might not? 

2.7.15
     What shall I render unto the Lord, that, whilst my memory recalls 
these things, my soul is not affrighted at them? I will love Thee, 
O Lord, and thank Thee, and confess unto Thy name; because Thou hast 
forgiven me these so great and heinous deeds of mine. To Thy grace 
I ascribe it, and to Thy mercy, that Thou hast melted away my sins 
as it were ice. To Thy grace I ascribe also whatsoever I have not 
done of evil; for what might I not have done, who even loved a sin 
for its own sake? Yea, all I confess to have been forgiven me; both 
what evils I committed by my own wilfulness, and what by Thy guidance 
I committed not. What man is he, who, weighing his own infirmity, 
dares to ascribe his purity and innocency to his own strength; that 
so he should love Thee the less, as if he had less needed Thy mercy, 
whereby Thou remittest sins to those that turn to Thee? For whosoever, 
called by Thee, followed Thy voice, and avoided those things which 
he reads me recalling and confessing of myself, let him not scorn 
me, who being sick, was cured by that Physician, through whose aid 
it was that he was not, or rather was less, sick: and for this let 
him love Thee as much, yea and more; since by whom he sees me to have 
been recovered from such deep consumption of sin, by Him he sees himself 
to have been from the like consumption of sin preserved.  

2.8.16
     What fruit had I then (wretched man!) in those things, of the 
remembrance whereof I am now ashamed? Especially, in that theft which 
I loved for the theft's sake; and it too was nothing, and therefore 
the more miserable I, who loved it. Yet alone I had not done it: such 
was I then, I remember, alone I had never done it. I loved then in 
it also the company of the accomplices, with whom I did it? I did 
not then love nothing else but the theft, yea rather I did love nothing 
else; for that circumstance of the company was also nothing. What 
is, in truth? who can teach me, save He that enlighteneth my heart, 
and discovereth its dark corners? What is it which hath come into 
my mind to enquire, and discuss, and consider? For had I then loved 
the pears I stole, and wished to enjoy them, I might have done it 
alone, had the bare commission of the theft sufficed to attain my 
pleasure; nor needed I have inflamed the itching of my desires by 
the excitement of accomplices. But since my pleasure was not in those 
pears, it was in the offence itself, which the company of fellow-sinners 
occasioned. 

2.9.17
     What then was this feeling? For of a truth it was too foul: and 
woe was me, who had it. But yet what was it? Who can understand his 
errors? It was the sport, which as it were tickled our hearts, that 
we beguiled those who little thought what we were doing, and much 
disliked it. Why then was my delight of such sort that I did it not 
alone? Because none doth ordinarily laugh alone? ordinarily no one; 
yet laughter sometimes masters men alone and singly when on one whatever 
is with them, if anything very ludicrous presents itself to their 
senses or mind. Yet I had not done this alone; alone I had never done 
it. Behold my God, before Thee, the vivid remembrance of my soul; 
alone, I had never committed that theft wherein what I stole pleased 
me not, but that I stole; nor had it alone liked me to do it, nor 
had I done it. O friendship too unfriendly! thou incomprehensible 
inveigler of the soul, thou greediness to do mischief out of mirth 
and wantonness, thou thirst of others' loss, without lust of my own 
gain or revenge: but when it is said, "Let's go, let's do it," we 
are ashamed not to be shameless. 

2.10.18
     Who can disentangle that twisted and intricate knottiness? Foul 
is it: I hate to think on it, to look on it. But Thee I long for, 
O Righteousness and Innocency, beautiful and comely to all pure eyes, 
and of a satisfaction unsating. With Thee is rest entire, and life 
imperturbable. Whoso enters into Thee, enters into the joy of his 
Lord: and shall not fear, and shall do excellently in the All-Excellent. 
I sank away from Thee, and I wandered, O my God, too much astray from 
Thee my stay, in these days of my youth, and I became to myself a 
barren land.

